## **SELFCHECKGPT: Zero-Resource Black-Box Hallucination Detection** **for Generative Large Language Models**

**Potsawee Manakul, Adian Liusie, Mark J. F. Gales**
ALTA Institute, Department of Engineering, University of Cambridge
pm574@cam.ac.uk, al826@cam.ac.uk, mjfg@eng.cam.ac.uk



**Abstract**


Generative Large Language Models (LLMs)
such as GPT-3 are capable of generating highly
fluent responses to a wide variety of user
prompts. However, LLMs are known to hallucinate facts and make non-factual statements
which can undermine trust in their output. Existing fact-checking approaches either require
access to the output probability distribution
(which may not be available for systems such
as ChatGPT) or external databases that are interfaced via separate, often complex, modules.
In this work, we propose "SelfCheckGPT", a
simple sampling-based approach that can be
used to fact-check the responses of black-box
models in a zero-resource fashion, i.e. without an external database. SelfCheckGPT leverages the simple idea that if an LLM has knowledge of a given concept, sampled responses
are likely to be similar and contain consistent
facts. However, for hallucinated facts, stochastically sampled responses are likely to diverge
and contradict one another. We investigate this
approach by using GPT-3 to generate passages
about individuals from the WikiBio dataset, and
manually annotate the factuality of the generated passages. We demonstrate that SelfCheckGPT can: i) detect non-factual and factual sentences; and ii) rank passages in terms of factuality. We compare our approach to several baselines and show that our approach has considerably higher AUC-PR scores in sentence-level
hallucination detection and higher correlation
scores in passage-level factuality assessment
compared to grey-box methods. [1]


**1** **Introduction**


Large Language Models (LLMs) such as GPT-3
(Brown et al., 2020) and PaLM (Chowdhery et al.,
2022) are capable of generating fluent and realistic
responses to a variety of user prompts. They have
been used in many applications such as automatic


1Code and dataset can be found on the project page at
[https://github.com/potsawee/selfcheckgpt.](https://github.com/potsawee/selfcheckgpt)



**Figure 1:** SelfCheckGPT with Prompt. Each LLM-generated
sentence is compared against stochastically generated responses with no external database. A comparison method
can be, for example, through LLM prompting as shown above.


tools to draft reports, virtual assistants and summarization systems. Despite the convincing and
realistic nature of LLM-generated texts, a growing
concern with LLMs is their tendency to hallucinate facts. It has been widely observed that models can confidently generate fictitious information,
and worryingly there are few, if any, existing approaches to suitably identify LLM hallucinations.
A possible approach of hallucination detection
is to leverage existing intrinsic uncertainty metrics
to determine the parts of the output sequence that
the system is least certain of (Yuan et al., 2021; Fu
et al., 2023). However, uncertainty metrics such
as token probability or entropy require access to
token-level probability distributions, information
which may not be available to users for example
when systems are accessed through limited external APIs. An alternate approach is to leverage
fact-verification approaches, where evidence is retrieved from an external database to assess the veracity of a claim (Thorne et al., 2018; Guo et al.,
2022). However, facts can only be assessed relative
to the knowledge present in the database. Addition














1




---PAGE BREAK---

ally, hallucinations are observed over a wide range
of tasks beyond pure fact verification (Kryscinski
et al., 2020; Maynez et al., 2020).
In this paper, we propose SelfCheckGPT, a
sampling-based approach that can detect whether
responses generated by LLMs are hallucinated or
factual. To the best of our knowledge, SelfCheckGPT is the first work to analyze model hallucination of general LLM responses, and is the first
zero-resource hallucination detection solution that
can be applied to black-box systems. The motivating idea of SelfCheckGPT is that when an LLM
has been trained on a given concept, the sampled responses are likely to be similar and contain consistent facts. However, for hallucinated facts, stochastically sampled responses are likely to diverge and
may contradict one another. By sampling multiple
responses from an LLM, one can measure information consistency between the different responses
and determine if statements are factual or hallucinated. Since SelfCheckGPT only leverages sampled responses, it has the added benefit that it can
be used for black-box models, and it requires no
external database. Five variants of SelfCheckGPT
for measuring informational consistency are considered: BERTScore, question-answering, _n_ -gram,
NLI, and LLM prompting. Through analysis of annotated articles generated by GPT-3, we show that
SelfCheckGPT is a highly effective hallucination
detection method that can even outperform greybox methods, and serves as a strong first baseline
for an increasingly important problem of LLMs.


**2** **Background and Related Work**


**2.1** **Hallucination of Large Language Models**


Hallucination has been studied in text generation
tasks, including summarization (Huang et al., 2021)
and dialogue generation (Shuster et al., 2021), as
well as in a variety of other natural language generation tasks (Ji et al., 2023). Self-consistency
decoding has shown to improve chain-of-thought
prompting performance on complex reasoning
tasks (Wang et al., 2023). Further, Liu et al. (2022)
introduce a hallucination detection dataset, however, texts are obtained by perturbing factual texts
and thus may not reflect true LLM hallucination.
Recently, Azaria and Mitchell (2023) trained a
multi-layer perception classifier where an LLM’s
hidden representations are used as inputs to predict the truthfulness of a sentence. However, this
approach is a white-box approach that uses the



internal states of the LLM, which may not be available through API calls, and requires labelled data
for supervised training. Another recent approach
is self-evaluation (Kadavath et al., 2022), where an
LLM is prompted to evaluate its previous prediction, e.g., to predict the probability that its generated response/answer is true.


**2.2** **Sequence Level Uncertainty Estimation**


Token probabilities have been used as an indication of model certainty. For example, OpenAI’s
GPT-3 web interface allows users to display token
probabilities (as shown in Figure 2), and further uncertainty estimation approaches based on aleatoric
and epistemic uncertainty have been studied for
autoregressive generation (Xiao and Wang, 2021;
Malinin and Gales, 2021). Additionally, conditional language model scores have been used to
evaluate properties of texts (Yuan et al., 2021; Fu
et al., 2023). Recently, semantic uncertainty has
been proposed to address uncertainty in free-form
generation tasks where probabilities are attached
to concepts instead of tokens (Kuhn et al., 2023).


**Figure 2:** Example of OpenAI’s GPT-3 web interface with
output token-level probabilities displayed.


**2.3** **Fact Verification**


Existing fact-verification approaches follow a
multi-stage pipeline of claim detection, evidence
retrieval and verdict prediction (Guo et al., 2022;
Zhong et al., 2020). Such methods, however, require access to external databases and can have
considerable inference costs.


**3** **Grey-Box Factuality Assessment**


This section will introduce methods that can be
used to determine the factuality of LLM responses
in a zero-resource setting when one has full access



2




---PAGE BREAK---

to output distributions. [2] We will use ‘factual’ to
define when statements are grounded in valid information, i.e. when hallucinations are avoided, and
‘zero-resource’ when no external database is used.


**3.1** **Uncertainty-based Assessment**


To understand how the factuality of a generated
response can be determined in a zero-resource setting, we consider LLM pre-training. During pretraining, the model is trained with next-word prediction over massive corpora of textual data. This
gives the model a strong understanding of language
(Jawahar et al., 2019; Raffel et al., 2020), powerful contextual reasoning (Zhang et al., 2020), as
well as world knowledge (Liusie et al., 2023). Consider the input "Lionel Messi is a _". Since
Messi is a world-famous athlete who may have
appeared multiple times in pre-training, the LLM
is likely to know who Messi is. Therefore given
the context, the token "footballer" may be assigned a high probability while other professions
such as "carpenter" may be considered improbable. However, for a different input such as "John
Smith is a _", the system will be unsure of the
continuation which may result in a flat probability
distribution. During inference, this is likely to lead
to a non-factual word being generated.
This insight allows us to understand the connection between uncertainty metrics and factuality.
Factual sentences are likely to contain tokens with
higher likelihood and lower entropy, while hallucinations are likely to come from positions with flat
probability distributions with high uncertainty.


**Token-level Probability**

Given the LLM’s response _R_, let _i_ denote the _i_ -th
sentence in _R_, _j_ denote the _j_ -th token in the _i_ -th
sentence, _J_ is the number of tokens in the sentence,
and _pij_ be the probability of the word generated by
the LLM at the _j_ -th token of the _i_ -th sentence. Two
probability metrics are used:



**Entropy**


The entropy of the output distribution is:


_Hij_ = _−_     - _pij_ ( ˜ _w_ ) log _pij_ ( ˜ _w_ )


_w_ ˜ _∈W_


where _pij_ ( ˜ _w_ ) is the probability of the word _w_ ˜ being
generated at the _j_ -th token of the _i_ -th sentence, and
_W_ is the set of all possible words in the vocabulary. Similar to the probability-based metrics, two
entropy-based metrics are used:



Avg( _H_ ) = [1]

_J_




- _Hij_ ; Max( _H_ ) = max ( _Hij_ )

_j_
_j_



Avg( _−_ log _p_ ) = _−_ [1]

_J_





log _pij_

_j_



Max( _−_ log _p_ ) = max ( _−_ log _pij_ )
_j_


Max( _−_ log _p_ ) measures the sentence’s likelihood
by assessing the _least_ likely token in the sentence.


2Alternate white-box approaches such as that of Azaria
and Mitchell (2023) require access to full internal states, and
is less practical and so not considered in this work.



**4** **Black-Box Factuality Assessment**


A drawback of grey-box methods is that they require output token-level probabilities. Though this
may seem a reasonable requirement, for massive
LLMs only available through limited API calls,
such token-level information may not be available
(such as with ChatGPT). Therefore, we consider
black-box approaches which remain applicable
even when only text-based responses are available.


**Proxy LLMs**


A simple approach to approximate the grey-box
approaches is by using a proxy LLM, i.e. another
LLM that we have full access to, such as LLaMA
(Touvron et al., 2023). A proxy LLM can be used
to approximate the output token-level probabilities
of the black-box LLM generating the text. In the
next section, we propose SelfCheckGPT, which is
also a black-box approach.


**5** **SelfCheckGPT**


SelfCheckGPT is our proposed black-box zeroresource hallucination detection scheme, which operates by comparing multiple sampled responses
and measuring consistency.
**Notation** : Let _R_ refer to an LLM response
drawn from a given user query. SelfCheckGPT
draws a further _N_ stochastic LLM response samples _{S_ [1] _, S_ [2] _, ..., S_ _[n]_ _, ..., S_ _[N]_ _}_ using the same query,
and then measures the consistency between the
response and the stochastic samples. We design
SelfCheckGPT to predict the hallucination score of
the _i_ -th sentence, _S_ ( _i_ ), such that _S_ ( _i_ ) _∈_ [0 _._ 0 _,_ 1 _._ 0],
where _S_ ( _i_ ) _→_ 0 _._ 0 if the _i_ -th sentence is grounded
in valid information and _S_ ( _i_ ) _→_ 1 _._ 0 if the _i_ -th sen


3




---PAGE BREAK---

tence is hallucinated. [3] The following subsections
will describe each of the SelfCheckGPT variants.


**5.1** **SelfCheckGPT with BERTScore**


Let _B_ ( _., ._ ) denote the BERTScore between two sentences. SelfCheckGPT with BERTScore finds the
average BERTScore of the _i_ -th sentence with the
most similar sentence from each drawn sample:



_N_ `m` _N_ + `n` _N_ `n` [.] [To take into account the answerability of]
generated questions, we show in Appendix B that
we can modify the inconsistency score by applying
soft-counting, resulting in:

_S_ QA( _i, q_ ) = _γ_ 2 _[N]_ `n` _[′]_ (5)
_γ_ 1 _[N]_ `[m]` _[′]_ + _γ_ 2 _[N]_ `[n]` _[′]_


where _N_ `m` _[′]_ [=] [the] [effective] [match] [count,] _[N]_ `n` _[′]_ [=] [the]
effective mismatch count, with _γ_ 1 and _γ_ 2 defined
in Appendix B.1. Ultimately, SelfCheckGPT with
QA is the average of inconsistency scores across _q_,


_S_ QA( _i_ ) = E _q_ [ _S_ QA( _i, q_ )] (6)


**5.3** **SelfCheckGPT with n-gram**

Given samples _{S_ [1] _, ..., S_ _[N]_ _}_ generated by an LLM,
one can use the samples to create a new language
model that approximates the LLM. In the limit as
_N_ gets sufficiently large, the new language model
will converge to the LLM that generated the responses. We can therefore approximate the LLM’s
token probabilities using the new language model.
In practice, due to time and/or cost constraints,
there can only be a limited number of samples _N_ .
Consequently, we train a simple _n_ -gram model using the samples _{S_ [1] _, ..., S_ _[N]_ _}_ as well as the main
response _R_ (which is assessed), where we note
that including _R_ can be considered as a smoothing
method where the count of each token in _R_ is increased by 1. We then compute the average of the
log-probabilities of the sentence in response _R_,



_S_ BERT( _i_ ) = 1 _−_ [1]

_N_



_N_


max ( _B_ ( _ri, s_ _[n]_ _k_ [))] (1)
_k_
_n_ =1



where _ri_ represents the _i_ -th sentence in _R_ and _s_ _[n]_ _k_
represents the _k_ -th sentence in the _n_ -th sample _S_ _[n]_ .
This way if the information in a sentence appears
in many drawn samples, one may assume that the
information is factual, whereas if the statement appears in no other sample, it is likely a hallucination.
In this work, RoBERTa-Large (Liu et al., 2019) is
used as the backbone of BERTScore.


**5.2** **SelfCheckGPT with Question Answering**


We also consider using the automatic multiplechoice question answering generation (MQAG)
framework (Manakul et al., 2023) to measure consistency for SelfCheckGPT. MQAG assesses consistency by generating multiple-choice questions
over the main generated response, which an independent answering system can attempt to answer
while conditioned on the other sampled responses.
If questions on consistent information are queried,
the answering system is expected to predict similar
answers. MQAG consists of two stages: question
generation G and question answering A. For the sentence _ri_ in the response _R_, we draw questions _q_
and options **o** :


_q,_ **o** _∼_ _P_ `G` ( _q,_ **o** _|ri, R_ ) (2)


The answering stage A selects the answers:


_aR_ = argmax [ _P_ `A` ( _ok|q, R,_ **o** )] (3)
_k_

_aSn_ = argmax [ _P_ `A` ( _ok|q, S_ _[n]_ _,_ **o** )] (4)
_k_


We compare whether _aR_ is equal to _aSn_ for each
sample in _{S_ [1] _, ..., S_ _[N]_ _}_, yielding #matches _N_ `m` and
#not-matches _N_ `n` . A simple inconsistency score
for the _i_ -th sentence and question _q_ based on the
match/not-match counts is defined: _S_ QA( _i, q_ ) =


3With the exception of SelfCheckGPT with _n_ -gram as the
score of the _n_ -gram language model is not bounded.



where _p_ ˜ _ij_ is the probability (of the _j_ -th token of the
_i_ -th sentence) computed using the _n_ -gram model.
Similar to the grey-box approach, we can also use
the maximum of the negative log probabilities,


_Sn_ [Max] -gram [(] _[i]_ [) = max] ( _−_ log ˜ _pij_ ) (8)
_j_


**5.4** **SelfCheckGPT with NLI**


Natural Language Inference (NLI) determines
whether a hypothesis follows a premise, classified
into either entailment/neutral/contradiction. NLI
measures have been used to measure faithfulness in
summarization, where Maynez et al. (2020) use
a textual entailment classifier trained on MNLI
(Williams et al., 2018) to determine if a summary
contradicts a context or not. Inspired by NLI-based



_Sn_ [Avg] -gram [(] _[i]_ [) =] _[ −]_ [1]

_J_





log ˜ _pij_ (7)

_j_



4




---PAGE BREAK---

summary assessment, we consider using the NLI
contradiction score as a SelfCheckGPT score.
For SelfCheck-NLI, we use DeBERTa-v3-large
(He et al., 2023) fine-tuned to MNLI as the NLI
model. The input for NLI classifiers is typically the
premise concatenated to the hypothesis, which
for our methodology is the sampled passage _S_ _[n]_

concatenated to the sentence to be assessed _ri_ .
Only the logits associated with the ‘entailment’
and ‘contradiction’ classes are considered,


exp( _zc_ )
_P_ (contradict _|ri, S_ _[n]_ ) = (9)
exp( _ze_ ) + exp( _zc_ )


where _ze_ and _zc_ are the logits of the ‘entailment’
and ‘contradiction’ classes, respectively. This normalization ignores the neutral class and ensures
that the probability is bounded between 0.0 and
1.0. The SelfCheckGPT with NLI score for each
sample _S_ _[n]_ is then defined as,



_S_ NLI( _i_ ) = [1]

_N_



_N_


_P_ (contradict _|ri, S_ _[n]_ ) (10)

_n_ =1



**5.5** **SelfCheckGPT with Prompt**


LLMs have recently been shown to be effective in
assessing information consistency between a document and its summary in zero-shot settings (Luo
et al., 2023). Thus, we query an LLM to assess
whether the _i_ -th sentence is supported by sample
_S_ _[n]_ (as the context) using the following prompt.


-----------------------------------------------Context: {}
Sentence: {}
Is the sentence supported by the context above?
Answer Yes or No:
-----------------------------------------------

Initial investigation showed that GPT-3 (textdavinci-003) will output either Yes or No 98% of
the time, while any remaining outputs can be set to
N/A. The output from prompting when comparing
the _i_ -th sentence against sample _S_ _[n]_ is converted to
score _x_ _[n]_ _i_ [through the mapping {][Yes][:] [0.0,][ No][:] [1.0,]
N/A: 0.5}. The final inconsistency score is then
calculated as:



**6** **Data and Annotation**


As, currently, there are no standard hallucination
detection datasets available, we evaluate our hallucination detection approaches by 1) generating synthetic Wikipedia articles using GPT-3 on the individuals/concepts from the WikiBio dataset (Lebret
et al., 2016); 2) manually annotating the factuality
of the passage at a sentence level; 3) evaluating the
system’s ability to detect hallucinations.
WikiBio is a dataset where each input contains
the first paragraph (along with tabular information)
of Wikipedia articles of a specific concept. We rank
the WikiBio test set in terms of paragraph length
and randomly sample 238 articles from the top
20% of longest articles (to ensure no very obscure
concept is selected). GPT-3 (text-davinci-003) is
then used to generate Wikipedia articles on a concept, using the prompt "This is a Wikipedia
passage about {concept}:". Table 1 provides
the statistics of GPT-3 generated passages.


#Passages #Sentences #Tokens/passage


238 1908 184.7 _±_ 36.9


**Table 1:** The statistics of **WikiBio GPT-3 dataset** where the
number of tokens is based on the OpenAI GPT-2 tokenizer.


We then annotate the sentences of the generated
passages using the guidelines shown in Figure 3
such that each sentence is classified as either:


  - **Major Inaccurate** (Non-Factual, **1** ): The sentence is entirely hallucinated, i.e. the sentence
is unrelated to the topic.


  - **Minor** **Inaccurate** (Non-Factual, **0.5** ): The
sentence consists of some non-factual information, but the sentence is related to the topic.


  - **Accurate** (Factual, **0** ): The information presented in the sentence is accurate.


Of the 1908 annotated sentences, 761 (39.9%) of
the sentences were labelled major-inaccurate, 631
(33.1%) minor-inaccurate, and 516 (27.0%) accurate. 201 sentences in the dataset had annotations
from two different annotators. To obtain a single label for this subset, if both annotators agree, then the
agreed label is used. However, if there is disagreement, then the worse-case label is selected (e.g.,
{minor inaccurate, major inaccurate} is mapped to
major inaccurate). The inter-annotator agreement,
as measured by Cohen’s _κ_ (Cohen, 1960), has _κ_



_S_ Prompt( _i_ ) = [1]

_N_



_N_


_x_ _[n]_ _i_ (11)
_n_ =1



SelfCheckGPT-Prompt is illustrated in Figure 1.
Note that our initial investigations found that less
capable models such as GPT-3 (text-curie-001) or
LLaMA failed to effectively perform consistency
assessment via such prompting.



5




---PAGE BREAK---

Major Inaccurate

**(Non-factual 1)**









Minor Inaccurate
**(Non-factual 0.5)**



Accurate
**(Factual 0)**


**Figure 3:** Flowchart of our annotation process


values of 0.595 and 0.748, indicating _moderate_ and
_substantial_ agreement (Viera et al., 2005) for the
3-class and 2-class scenarios, respectively. [4]

Furthermore, passage-level scores are obtained
by averaging the sentence-level labels in each passage. The distribution of passage-level scores is
shown in Figure 4, where we observe a large peak
at +1.0. We refer to the points at this peak as _total_
_hallucination_, which occurs when the information
of the response is unrelated to the real concept and
is entirely fabricated by the LLM.


30


25



20


15


10


5


0



0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Avg. Factuality per Document (0=Factual, +1=Non-Factual)



**Figure 4:** Document factuality scores histogram plot


**7** **Experiments**


The generative LLM used to generate passages for
our dataset is **GPT-3** (text-davinci-003), the stateof-the-art system at the time of creating and annotating the dataset. To obtain the main response, we
set the temperature to 0.0 and use standard beam
search decoding. For the stochastically generated
samples, we set the temperature to 1.0 and generate


43-class refers to when selecting between accurate, minor inaccurate, major inaccurate. 2-class refers to when minor/major inaccuracies are combined into one label.



_N_ =20 samples. For the proxy LLM approach, we
use LLaMA (Touvron et al., 2023), one of the bestperforming open-source LLMs currently available.
For SelfCheckGPT-Prompt, we consider both GPT3 (which is the same LLM that is used to generate
passages) as well as the newly released ChatGPT
(gpt-3.5-turbo). More details about the systems in
SelfCheckGPT and results using other proxy LLMs
can be found in the appendix.


**7.1** **Sentence-level Hallucination Detection**


First, we investigate whether our hallucination detection methods can identify the factuality of sentences. In detecting non-factual sentences, both
major-inaccurate labels and minor-inaccurate labels are grouped together into the _non-factual_ class,
while the _factual_ class refers to accurate sentences.
In addition, we consider a more challenging task of
detecting major-inaccurate sentences in passages
that are _not_ total hallucination passages, which we
refer to as _non-factual_ _[∗]_ . [5] Figure 5 and Table 2
show the performance of our approaches, where
the following observations can be made:

**1) LLM’s probabilities** _p_ **correlate well with**
**factuality** . Our results show that probability measures (from the LLM generating the texts) are
strong baselines for assessing factuality. Factual
sentences can be identified with an AUC-PR of
53.97, significantly better than the random baseline
of 27.04, with the AUC-PR for hallucination detection also increasing from 72.96 to 83.21. This supports the hypothesis that when the LLMs are uncertain about generated information, generated tokens
often have higher uncertainty, paving a promising
direction for hallucination detection approaches.
Also, the probability _p_ measure performs better
than the entropy _H_ measure of top-5 tokens.
**2) Proxy LLM perform noticeably worse than**
**LLM (GPT-3)** . The results of proxy LLM (based
on LLaMA) show that the entropy _H_ measures
outperform the probability measures. This suggests that using richer uncertainty information can
improve factuality/hallucination detection performance, and that previously the entropy of top-5
tokens is likely to be insufficient. In addition, when
using other proxy LLMs such as GPT-NeoX or
OPT-30B, the performance is near that of the random baseline. We believe this poor performance
occurs as different LLMs have different generating
patterns, and so even common tokens may have a


5There are 206 non-factual _∗_ passages (1632 sentences).



6




---PAGE BREAK---

|Col1|Random<br>GPT-3 Avg(-logP)<br>SelfCk-BERTScore<br>SelfCk-QA<br>SelfCk-Unigram<br>SelfCk-Prompt<br>SelfCk-NLI|Random<br>GPT-3 Avg(-logP)<br>SelfCk-BERTScore<br>SelfCk-QA<br>SelfCk-Unigram<br>SelfCk-Prompt|
|---|---|---|
|0.0|0.2<br>0.4<br>0.6<br>0.8<br>1.0<br>Recall|0.2<br>0.4<br>0.6<br>0.8<br>1.0<br>Recall|


**(b)** Non-Factual* Sentences



0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Recall


**(c)** Factual Sentences



1.0


0.9


0.8


0.7


0.6


0.5


0.4


0.3


0.2



1.0


0.9


0.8


0.7


0.6


0.5


0.4


0.3



1.00


0.95


0.90


0.85


0.80


0.75


0.70



|Random<br>GPT-3 Avg(-logP)<br>SelfCk-BERTScore<br>SelfCk-QA<br>SelfCk-Unigram<br>SelfCk-Prompt<br>SelfCk-NLI|Col2|Random<br>GPT-3 Avg(-logP)<br>SelfCk-BERTScore<br>SelfCk-QA<br>SelfCk-Unigram<br>SelfCk-Prompt|
|---|---|---|
|0.0|0.2<br>0.4<br>0.6<br>0.8<br>1.0<br>Recall|0.2<br>0.4<br>0.6<br>0.8<br>1.0<br>Recall|


**(a)** Non-Factual Sentences



**Figure 5:** PR-Curve of detecting non-factual and factual _sentences_ in the GPT-3 generated WikiBio passages.


Sentence-level (AUC-PR) Passage-level (Corr.)
Method
NonFact NonFact* Factual Pearson Spearman


Random 72.96 29.72 27.04      -      GPT-3 (text-davinci-003)’s probabilities ( _LLM, grey-box_ )
Avg( _−_ log _p_ ) 83.21 38.89 53.97 57.04 53.93
Avg( _H_ ) _[†]_ 80.73 37.09 52.07 55.52 50.87
Max( _−_ log _p_ ) 87.51 35.88 50.46 57.83 55.69
Max( _H_ ) _[†]_ 85.75 32.43 50.27 52.48 49.55
LLaMA-30B’s probabilities ( _Proxy LLM, black-box_ )
Avg( _−_ log _p_ ) 75.43 30.32 41.29 21.72 20.20
Avg( _H_ ) 80.80 39.01 42.97 33.80 39.49
Max( _−_ log _p_ ) 74.01 27.14 31.08 -22.83 -22.71
Max( _H_ ) 80.92 37.32 37.90 35.57 38.94
**SelfCheckGPT** ( _black-box)_
w/ BERTScore 81.96 45.96 44.23 58.18 55.90
w/ QA 84.26 40.06 48.14 61.07 59.29
w/ Unigram (max) 85.63 41.04 58.47 64.71 64.91
w/ NLI 92.50 45.17 66.08 74.14 73.78
w/ Prompt **93.42** **53.19** **67.09** **78.32** **78.30**


**Table 2:** AUC-PR for sentence-level detection tasks. Passage-level ranking performances are measured by Pearson correlation
coefficient and Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient w.r.t. human judgements. The results of other proxy LLMs, in addition to
LLaMA, can be found in the appendix. _[†]_ GPT-3 API returns the top-5 tokens’ probabilities, which are used to compute entropy.



low probability in situations where the response
is dissimilar to the generation style of the proxy
LLM. We note that a weighted conditional LM
score such as BARTScore (Yuan et al., 2021) could
be incorporated in future investigations.
**3) SelfCheckGPT outperforms grey-box ap-**
**proaches** . It can be seen that SelfCheckGPTPrompt _considerably_ outperforms the grey-box approaches (including GPT-3’s output probabilities)
as well as other black-box approaches. Even other
variants of SelfCheckGPT, including BERTScore,
QA, and _n_ -gram, outperform the grey-box approaches in most setups. Interestingly, despite being the least computationally expensive method,
SelfCheckGPT with unigram (max) works well



across different setups. Essentially, when assessing
a sentence, this method picks up the token with
the _lowest_ occurrence given all the samples. This
suggests that if a token only appears a few times
(or once) within the generated samples ( _N_ =20), it
is likely non-factual.
**4) SelfCheckGPT with** _n_ **-gram** . When investigating the _n_ -gram performance from 1-gram to
5-gram, the results show that simply finding the
least likely token/ _n_ -gram is more effective than
computing the average _n_ -gram score of the sentence, details in appendix Table 7. Additionally,
as _n_ increases, the performance of SelfCheckGPT
with _n_ -gram (max) drops.
**5)** **SelfCheckGPT** **with** **NLI** . The NLI-based



7




---PAGE BREAK---

0.7


0.6


0.5


0.4


0.3


0.2


0.1


0.0



0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Human Score (0=Factual, +1=Non-Factual)


**(a)** GPT-3 Avg( _−_ log _p_ )



25


20


15


10


5



1.0


0.8


0.6


0.4


0.2


0.0



0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Human Score (0=Factual, +1=Non-Factual)


**(c)** SelfCheckGPT-Prompt



0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Human Score (0=Factual, +1=Non-Factual)


**(b)** LLaMA-30B Avg( _H_ )



**Figure 6:** Scatter plot of passage-level scores where Y-axis = Method scores, X-axis = Human scores. Correlations are reported
in Table 2. The scatter plots of other SelfCheckGPT variants are provided in Figure 10 in the appendix.



method outperforms all black-box and grey-box
baselines, and its performance is close to the performance of the Prompt method. As SelfCheckGPT with Prompt can be computationally heavy,
SelfCheckGPT with NLI could be the most practical method as it provides a good trade-off between
performance and computation.


**7.2** **Passage-level Factuality Ranking**


Previous results demonstrate that SelfCheckGPT
is an effective approach for predicting sentencelevel factuality. An additional consideration is
whether SelfCheckGPT can also be used to determine the overall factuality of passages. Passagelevel factuality scores are calculated by averaging
the sentence-level scores over all sentences.



_S_ passage = [1]

_|R|_




- _S_ ( _i_ ) (12)


_i_



**7.3** **Ablation Studies**


**External Knowledge (instead of SelfCheck)**

If external knowledge is available, one can measure
the informational consistency between the LLM
response and the information source. In this experiment, we use the first paragraph of each concept
that is available in WikiBio. [6]


Sent-lvl AUC-PR Passage-lvl
Method
NoFac NoFac* Fact Pear. Spear.


SelfCk-BERT 81.96 45.96 44.23 58.18 55.90
WikiBio+BERT 81.32 40.62 49.15 58.71 55.80


SelfCk-QA 84.26 40.06 48.14 61.07 59.29
WikiBio+QA 84.18 45.40 52.03 57.26 53.62


SelfCk-1gm 85.63 41.04 58.47 64.71 64.91
WikiBio+1gm 80.43 31.47 40.53 28.67 26.70


SelfCk-NLI 92.50 45.17 66.08 74.14 73.78
WikiBio+NLI 91.18 48.14 71.61 78.84 80.00


SelfCk-Prompt 93.42 53.19 67.09 78.32 78.30
WikiBio+Prompt 93.59 65.26 73.11 85.90 86.11


**Table 3:** The performance when using SelfCheckGPT samples
versus external stored knowledge.


Our findings in Table 3 show the following. First,
SelfCheckGPT with BERTScore/QA, using selfsamples, can yield comparable or even better performance than when using the reference passage.
Second, SelfCheckGPT with _n_ -gram shows a large
performance drop when using the WikiBio passages instead of self-samples. This failure is attributed to the fact that the WikiBio reference text
alone is not sufficient to train an _n_ -gram model.
Third, in contrast, SelfCheckGPT with NLI/Prompt
can benefit considerably when access to retrieved
information is available. Nevertheless, in practice,


6This method is no longer zero-resource as it requires
retrieving relevant knowledge from external data.



where _S_ ( _i_ ) is the sentence-level score, and _|R|_
is the number of sentences in the passage. Since
human judgement is somewhat subjective, averaging the sentence-level labels would lead to ground
truths with less noise. Note that for Avg( _−_ log _p_ )
and Avg( _H_ ), we compute the average over all tokens in a passage. Whereas for Max( _−_ log _p_ ) and
Max( _H_ ), we first take the maximum operation over
tokens at the sentence level, and we then average
over all sentences following Equation 12.
Our results in Table 2 and Figure 6 show that all
SelfCheckGPT methods correlate far better with
human judgements than the other baselines, including the grey-box probability and entropy methods. SelfCheckGPT-Prompt is the best-performing
method, achieving the highest Pearson correlation
of 78.32. Unsurprisingly, the proxy LLM approach
again achieves considerably lower correlations.



8




---PAGE BREAK---

