## **LM vs LM: Detecting Factual Errors via Cross Examination**

**Roi Cohen** [1] **May Hamri** [1] **Mor Geva** [2] **Amir Globerson** [1] _[,]_ [3]

1Blavatnik School of Computer Science, Tel Aviv University

2Google DeepMind 3Google Research


{roi1, mayhamri}@mail.tau.ac.il, pipek@google.com, gamir@tauex.tau.ac.il



**Abstract**


A prominent weakness of modern language
models (LMs) is their tendency to generate factually incorrect text, which hinders their usability. A natural question is whether such factual errors can be detected automatically. Inspired by truth-seeking mechanisms in law, we
propose a factuality evaluation framework for
LMs that is based on cross-examination. Our
key idea is that an incorrect claim is likely to
result in inconsistency with other claims that
the model generates. To discover such inconsistencies, we facilitate a multi-turn interaction
between the LM that generated the claim and
another LM (acting as an examiner) which introduces questions to discover inconsistencies.
We empirically evaluate our method on factual
claims made by multiple recent LMs on four
benchmarks, finding that it outperforms existing methods and baselines, often by a large
gap. Our results demonstrate the potential of
using interacting LMs to capture factual errors.


**1** **Introduction**


Modern language models (LMs) often generate inconsistent (Elazar et al., 2021), non-attributable
(Rashkin et al., 2021; Bohnet et al., 2022; Liu et al.,
2023a), or factually incorrect text (Tam et al., 2022;
Devaraj et al., 2022; Maynez et al., 2020), thus
negatively impacting the reliability of these models
(Amodei et al., 2016; Hendrycks et al., 2021). This
has prompted the community to develop methods
that calibrate the confidence of model predictions
to better align with their quality (Brundage et al.,
2020). For example, prior methods have used probabilistic approaches (Jiang et al., 2020; Zablotskaia
et al., 2023) clustering (Kuhn et al., 2023), finetuning (Kadavath et al., 2022; Lin et al., 2022) and
in-context learning (Alivanistos et al., 2022; Cohen
et al., 2023).
In this work, we take a different approach to
this problem, motivated by truth-seeking mechanisms in law. Specifically, we consider the setting



Figure 1: An example of our LMVLM approach. The
first line shows the statement made by the EXAMINEE
LLM. Then an interaction between the EXAMINER and
EXAMINEE takes place, and the EXAMINER arrives at
a conclusion whether the original statement was correct
or not (here it concludes that it was a false statement).


where a witness is cross-examined in order to check
whether their statement is factually correct or not.
In such a setting, the examiner asks questions that
aim to lead towards contradictory statements by the
witness, while a contradiction implies that the witness lied at least in some of the statements, hence
the well known quote _“Were you lying then or are_
_you lying now?”_ (Wilder et al., 1957).

To employ this mechanism to LM factual calibration, we propose the following setting, illustrated in
Figure 1. Our goal is to check whether a statement
made by an LM ( _“The Greek god of marriage is_
_Hera”_ ) is factually correct. We refer to the model






---PAGE BREAK---

that generated this statement as the EXAMINEE.
To check whether this fact is correct, we use another LM, called EXAMINER, to conduct a crossexamination of EXAMINEE. Concretely, we craft
designated prompts to facilitate a multi-turn interaction between the two LMs, where EXAMINER
issues questions (e.g., _“Is_ _Hera_ _associated_ _with_
_marriage in any way?”_ ) to EXAMINEE to check
the veracity of the original statement. The examination is concluded by a decision from EXAMINER as
to whether the original claim was correct or not. [1]


Our problem setting is related to that of calibration (Guo et al., 2017), where the goal is to predict
the probability at which a model will err. However, unlike previous approaches to this problem,
we use text generated by LMs. Our approach is motivated by the intuition that calibration is actually
an elaborate reasoning process where one checks
the level of support that a fact has based on other
statements the model believes. We argue that such
complex reasoning is naturally performed via the
strong conversational skills of modern LMs.


We use our method to detect errors in LM generation in the context of factual question-answering.
Our experiments with several recent LMs – CHATGPT, GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020; Ouyang et al.,
2022), and LLAMA (Touvron et al., 2023) – show
that cross-examination effectively detects factually
incorrect claims generated by LMs. Specifically,
across multiple datasets and examination settings,
it detects over 70% of the incorrect claims while
maintaining a high precision of _>_ 80%, outperforming strong baselines by a large gap.


Further analysis shows that examiner LMs introduce multiple questions throughout the examination, and employ various strategies to reveal
inconsistencies, including question paraphrasing,
validation of implicated arguments, claim decomposition, and requests for evidence.


To conclude, our contributions are (a) framing
the task of factuality testing as an interaction between two LMs, (b) proposing a concrete implementation of this interaction via the use of one LM
with different prompts in a zero-shot setting, and
(c) demonstrating improved factuality detection accuracy across several benchmarks.


1In practice, EXAMINER and EXAMINEE can be the same
LM (e.g., GPT-3) that is prompted in two different ways to
define its different roles.



**2** **LM Cross-Examination**


Our goal is to employ an “examiner” LM
(EXAMINER) to evaluate claims generated by another LM (EXAMINEE). To this end, we leverage
the recent success of prompting (Liu et al., 2023b),
to facilitate a cross-examination setting between
the two LMs. In such a setting, EXAMINER should
introduce questions with the objective of revealing inconsistencies with respect to an initial claim
made by EXAMINEE. Such inconsistencies can be
considered as a signal for uncertainty of EXAMI
NEE in its original claim, and thus, can be used to
assess whether its original statement was correct.
Given an EXAMINER LM and a claim _C_ generated by an EXAMINEE, our method establishes
a multi-turn interaction between the LMs, where
at each turn the other LM is prompted with a designated prompt that incorporates the outputs from
previous turns. This interaction continues until the
examiner has no further questions and can provide
its final decision. To establish a meaningful interaction that reveals possible inconsistencies, we define
three stages for the examination, each guided by
a specific prompt. As part of each prompt for EX
AMINEE or EXAMINER, we provide the outputs
generated in the previous rounds for context. We
next describe the examination stages in detail, with
the overall process illustrated in Figure 2.


**Stage 1:** **Setup** The examination begins by “assigning” the EXAMINER its role. Namely, describing the task setting, providing it with the EXAM
INEE’s claim, and asking it to generate questions
for the EXAMINEE. [2]

Next, we feed the questions generated by EXAM
INER, one at a time, to EXAMINEE, concatenated
to the following instructions: Please answer the
following questions regarding your claim.
The response from EXAMINEE yields a set of answers to the questions from EXAMINER.


**Stage 2: Follow-up Questions** We next feed EX
AMINER with the answers generated by EXAMINEE
to its initial questions, and ask EXAMINER whether
it has any follow-up questions. Notably, outputs
from EXAMINER at this stage are conditioned on
the previous output from EXAMINEE. If the answer from EXAMINER is “Yes”, we then further
prompt it to obtain more questions. This phase is


2We observe that this effectively steers EXAMINER to ask
natural questions directly related to the given claim _C_ (§5).




---PAGE BREAK---

Figure 2: The three-stage process of cross-examination
between the EXAMINER and EXAMINEE, where the
factuality of a claim _C_ generated by EXAMINEE is estimated by EXAMINER.


conducted iteratively, until either EXAMINER declares it has no follow-up questions, or the number
of turns has reached a threshold. [3]


**Stage** **3:** **Factuality** **Decision** Once no further questions are obtained from EXAMINER, we
prompt it to conclude whether the claim _C_ is true
or false. Specifically, we request it to reply with
either “correct” or “incorrect” as its final conclusion. In cases where the examiner does not output
either of “correct” or “incorrect”, we consider its
final decision to be a rejection of the claim. Typically though, we observe that the examiner follows
the instructions and indeed generates a definitive
conclusion (see statistics in §5).


**3** **Related Work**


**Attribution** **and** **Fact** **Checking** Our goal is
closely related to works on attribution and fact verification. Namely, checking if a LM-generated text
is faithful to some source text (Bohnet et al., 2022;
Honovich et al., 2022). This problem has been
addressed via several approaches, including question generation (Wang et al., 2020; Honovich et al.,
2021; Scialom et al., 2021), NLI (Thorne et al.,
2018; Welleck et al., 2019; Maynez et al., 2020;


3We use a maximum of five turns in our experiments.



Dziri et al., 2022; Gao et al., 2022; Kamoi et al.,
2023), data augmentation (Atanasova et al., 2022;
Wright et al., 2022; Gekhman et al., 2023), and
planning schemes that allow the model to self-edit
its own generation (Schick et al., 2022). Unlike
these works, we are not assuming any reference
text or an external knowledge base. Instead, we
directly check if the LM’s claim is likely to be correct, by probing the model for inconsistencies. Our
approach also uses multi-turn dialogue as a key
component.


**Model** **Calibration** A key challenge with prediction models is to provide a probability of the
answer being incorrect, a problem known as model
calibration (Guo et al., 2017). The problem of
factual-error detection can be viewed as a variation of calibration, where instead of a continuous probability, we provide a binary prediction for
whether the model is correct or not. This is also
related to the setting of selective prediction, where
a model can choose to abstain from answering a
query (Varshney et al., 2022; Kamath et al., 2020).
Common approaches to calibration are to perform
various transformations on model logits (Desai and
Durrett, 2020; Jiang et al., 2021), and measuring
uncertainty (e.g., see Kuhn et al., 2023). More
recent works have studied the use of LMs for providing calibration, by training them on statements
known to be factually correct or incorrect. This
“supervised” approach has been explored via finetuning (Kadavath et al., 2022; Lin et al., 2022) and
in-context learning (Cohen et al., 2023; Alivanistos
et al., 2022).

Our work focuses on zero-shot factual error detection that involves just two categories: predicting
whether a model’s claim is correct or incorrect. We
propose a novel approach to this problem, using
multi-turn LLM interaction. While we focus on a
binary setting, one could envision an extension of
our approach to continuous outputs (for example, to
output a probabilistic estimation for the correctness
of the claim).


**Multi-Agent** **LMs** Using multiple LMs in an
interactive manner is a relatively new idea with
many potential applications. It has been shown
that LMs can utilize additional LMs or tools to better solve downstream tasks (Schick et al., 2023).
Additionally, Park et al. (2022) showed that in
a social setting, LMs demonstrate certain social
skills that emerge from this interaction, and Shinn




---PAGE BREAK---

et al. (2023) proposes that a LM can use a different
model to instruct it when to “reflect” on its recent
action, while performing a planned sequence of
actions aimed at solving a given query. Intuitively,
this model detects signs of hallucination or inefficient planning within the LM’s trajectory.


**Consistency** **Across** **Generations** LMs have
been shown to generate inconsistent outputs given
different prompt paraphrases (Elazar et al., 2021;
Newman et al., 2021). Prior work showed that
prompts can be automatically optimized to produce factually correct claims more robustly (Lester
et al., 2021; Zhong et al., 2021; Qin and Eisner,
2021). Hao et al. (2022) utilized multiple generated paraphrases to gauge consistency (Hao et al.,
2022), and other works (Elazar et al., 2021; Zhou
et al., 2022) further proposed training objectives
to improve model consistency. Another approach
to handling multiple outputs is via variants of decoding strategies (Wang et al., 2022), or model
ensembles (Sun et al., 2022). In our work, we build
on these, assuming inconsistencies are more likely
to occur with incorrect claims, and let an examiner
model search for these by introducing questions to
the examinee.


**Chain of Thought Reasoning** Recent work has
shown that LMs can be prompted to elaborate
on their reasoning process, to self-ask themselves
follow-up questions, before reaching a final conclusion, and that this could be exploited to improve mathematical, multi-hop and common-sense
reasoning skills (Wei et al., 2022; Press et al.,
2022; Yoran et al., 2023), along with planning
and problem-solving abilities (Huang et al., 2022;
Long, 2023). Another interesting approach to complex reasoning in LMs is recent work on Maieutic
prompting (Jung et al., 2022), that answers a question by recursively generating a set of facts and
reasoning over those.

Our approach may be viewed as constructing
an elaborate chain-of-thought explanation for the
examinee’s claim. However, we do not train this
explanation via in-context or fine-tuning, and rather
rely on different prompts for its generation.


**4** **Experiments**


In this section, we conduct experiments on multiple datasets and models to evaluate our approach,
focusing on the task of factual question-answering.



**4.1** **Experimental Setup**


**Factual Question Answering** One key use-case
of LMs is answering questions seeking factual
knowledge. For example, _“How old was Barack_
_Obama when he was first elected?”_ . In such cases,
it is crucial for the model to answer the question
correctly, or to indicate that it does not know the
answer. We thus evaluate our approach on several
Question Answering and Fact Completion datasets.
These are typically provided as a set of ( _Q, A_ ) pairs
of a question _Q_ and its ground-truth answer _A_ .
Having gold answers allows us to evaluate if a predicted answer is factually correct or not, which can
be used to evaluate our LMVLM approach.
To apply cross-examination in this setting, we
first convert the answer predicted by the model into
a EXAMINEE claim that can be provided as input to
the examination procedure. Formally, given a question _Q_, if _Q_ is phrased as a fill-in-the-blank question (e.g. _“Bailey Peninsula is located in ____”_ ),
then we feed it to the EXAMINEE model to obtain
a prediction that completes the sentence and forms
a claim. In cases where _Q_ is phrased as a question
(e.g. _“Where is Bailey Peninsula located?”_ ), we
prompt the model to provide an answer in a claim
format with: “Please answer the following
question: < _Q_ - Please phrase your answer
as a claim.” This process results in a claim
_C_ that states the model’s “belief” about the answer to _Q_ . We then evaluate the truthfulness of _C_
through cross-examination, and compare the examiner’s decision of whether _C_ is correct or not to the
ground-truth correctness.


**Factuality** **Evaluation** **Labels** To evaluate our
method, it is necessary to have “gold decisions” to
compare the examiner’s decisions against. Such
labels can be obtained from the ground-truth answers in the data, namely, the decision for a claim
_C_ is correct if it matches an evaluation of _C_ against
the gold answer _A_ . To evaluate if the claim _C_ obtained for a question _Q_ is correct with respect to
the ground-truth answer _A_, we first check if _A_ or
any of its aliases (if provided as part of the dataset,
e.g., “FC Tottenham” and “Tottenham Hotspur”)
appears as a sub-string in _C_ (Schick et al., 2023;
Meng et al., 2022). Next, to avoid incorrect labels
resulting from this automatic evaluation (Bulian
et al., 2022), we manually review all the claims
marked as incorrect in the first step, and fix any labeling mistakes. We also filter out any ambiguous
or unclear claims generated by EXAMINEE.




---PAGE BREAK---

**Stage** **GPT3 Prompt(s)** **ChatGPT Prompt(s)**



(1) Setup Imagine trying to prove
that a claim that someone
claims is true, is wrong.
You have the opportunity
to ask any question in
order to prove that the
claim is wrong. The claim
is: < _C_ >.
What would you ask in order
to validate that?



Your goal is to try to verify the correctness of the
following claim:< _C_ >, based on the background information
you will gather. To gather this, You will provide short
questions whose purpose will be to verify the correctness
of the claim, and I will reply to you with the answers
to these. Hopefully, with the help of the background
questions and their answers, you will be able to reach a
conclusion as to whether the claim is correct or possibly
incorrect. Please keep asking questions as long as you’re
yet to be sure regarding the true veracity of the claim.
Please start with the first questions.



(2) Follow-Up (i) Do you have any follow-up questions? Please answer with Yes or No.
Questions (ii) What are the follow-up questions?


(3) Factuality Based on the interviewee’s answers to your questions, what is your conclusion
Decision regarding the correctness of the claim? Do you think it is correct or incorrect?


Table 1: Prompts provided to EXAMINER in each stage of the examination, with respect to a claim _C_ by EXAMINEE.



EXAMINEE LAMA TriviaQA NQ PopQA


LLAMA-7B 53.9 48.4 33.8 24.9
GPT-3 79.8 74.2 50.1 43.9
CHATGPT 80.9 77.2 53.3 45.6


Table 2: Portion of factually correct claims by every
EXAMINEE LM on each dataset.


**Examiner Evaluation** We evaluate how well the
examiner detects claims that are factually incorrect,
using the following metrics: [4]


- **Precision** : the portion of incorrect claims, out of
the claims rejected by the examiner.

- **Recall** : the portion of incorrect claims rejected
by the examiner, out of all the incorrect claims.

- **F1** : the harmonic mean of precision and recall.


For completeness, we additionally report (in §C)
the complementary Precision, Recall, and F1 scores
with respect to detection of correct claims.


**Data** We consider the following datasets: LAMA
(Petroni et al., 2019), TriviaQA (Joshi et al., 2017),
Natural Questions (NQ) (Kwiatkowski et al., 2019)
and PopQA (Mallen et al., 2022). These datasets
cover a wide range of queries, from real user
queries (NQ), to trivia questions (TriviaQA), and
subject-relation-object facts phrased as queries
(LAMA, PopQA). We consider the closed-book
open-ended setting, where we do not provide any
context or answer choices to the model. We evaluate our approach on 1,000 random examples from
the test set (or from the development set if a test


4We say that the examiner “rejects” a claim if the examiner
concludes that the claim is incorrect.



Table 3: Example false claims generated by CHATGPT
for PopQA and by GPT-3 for TriviaQA.


set is not available). [5]


In addition, we created a dataset of false claims
to further test our approach. This “Falsehoods”
dataset contains only wrong claims, created separately for each model (GPT-3 and CHATGPT)
and for each of the four QA datasets. Concretely,
given a model and a question _Q_, we prompt the
model to generate a false answer (see §B for details). We verify that these are indeed incorrect
claims by checking that the gold answer (and any
of its aliases, if they exist) does not occur in the
generated text. This yields a subset of examples
that are realistic, namely, the answer matches the
target type (e.g., “a city”) but is incorrect (see examples in Table 3). The examiner’s decision for
these examples should always be to reject.


5We use only a subset of examples due to the high cost
of executing large LMs like GPT-3, which we include in our
experiments.



**False claim** **Correct claim**



_“Wanlockhead is the highest_
_village in France because it is_
_located in the French Alps.”_


_“Louis_ _Oosthuizen_ _the_ _2010_
_Open Golf Champion is Amer-_
_ican, because he was born in_
_the United States.”_


_“The screenwriter for "Smile"_
_was_ _definitely_ _Steven_ _Spiel-_
_berg.”_


_“Fontenay_ _is_ _located_ _in_ _the_
_beautiful_ _country_ _of_ _Antarc-_
_tica.”_



_“Wanlockhead is the high-_
_est village in Scotland, a_
_country in Europe.”_


_“Louis_ _Oosthuizen,_ _the_
_2010_ _Open_ _Golf_ _Cham-_
_pion, is South African.”_


_“The_ _screenwriter_ _for_
_"Smile"_ _was_ _Jerry_ _Bel-_
_son.”_


_“Fontenay_ _is_ _located_ _in_
_France.”_




---PAGE BREAK---

LAMA TriviaQA NQ PopQA

**P** **R** **F1** **P** **R** **F1** **P** **R** **F1** **P** **R** **F1**


AYS 82 _._ 3 25 _._ 2 38 _._ 6 79 _._ 9 17 _._ 9 29 _._ 2 85 _._ 2 29 _._ 1 43 _._ 3 78 _._ 4 35 _._ 7 63 _._ 9
IDK 49 _._ 1 52 _._ 4 50 _._ 7 48 _._ 7 66 _._ 5 56 _._ 2 62 _._ 5 60 _._ 7 61 _._ 6 70 _._ 0 61 _._ 1 65 _._ 2


**LMVLM** 85 _._ 1 70 _._ 7 76 _._ 7 82 _._ 8 71 _._ 6 76 _._ 8 74 _._ 5 74 _._ 9 77 _._ 7 83 _._ 6 77 _._ 1 80 _._ 2
**LMVLM** (Majority) **86** _._ **6** **75** _._ **8** **80** _._ **8** **84** _._ **5** **80** _._ **8** **82** _._ **6** **82** _._ **3** **76** _._ **1** **79** _._ **1** **87** _._ **0** **84** _._ **0** **85** _._ **4**

      - Follow-up 83 _._ 8 68 _._ 1 75 _._ 1 82 _._ 3 69 _._ 7 75 _._ 5 74 _._ 8 72 _._ 1 73 _._ 4 82 _._ 0 73 _._ 3 77 _._ 4


Table 4: Precision (P), Recall (R), and F1 scores for LMVLM with CHATGPT as EXAMINER and EXAMINEE,
compared to baselines. The last row shows an ablation of our method without the follow-up questions stage.


LAMA TriviaQA NQ PopQA

**P** **R** **F1** **P** **R** **F1** **P** **R** **F1** **P** **R** **F1**


AYS 74 _._ 8 17 _._ 9 28 _._ 9 80 _._ 3 19 _._ 8 31 _._ 8 74 _._ 9 20 _._ 7 32 _._ 3 74 _._ 6 22 _._ 7 34 _._ 8
IDK 43 _._ 0 42 _._ 1 42 _._ 5 47 _._ 9 45 _._ 7 46 _._ 7 60 _._ 9 45 _._ 3 52 _._ 0 52 _._ 1 37 _._ 6 43 _._ 7
Confidence-Based 38 _._ 6 **85** _._ **8** 53 _._ 2 39 _._ 6 **84** _._ **4** 53 _._ 9 56 _._ 2 72 _._ 7 63 _._ 4 60 _._ 8 69 _._ 7 64 _._ 9
IC-IDK 71 _._ 5 46 _._ 3 56 _._ 2 70 _._ 6 49 _._ 7 60 _._ 1 70 _._ 0 57 _._ 6 63 _._ 2 76 _._ 9 37 _._ 7 50 _._ 6


**LMVLM** 78 _._ 8 69 _._ 9 74 _._ 1 81 _._ 6 64 _._ 6 72 _._ 1 70 _._ 5 66 _._ 6 68 _._ 5 75 _._ 5 69 _._ 1 72 _._ 2
**LMVLM** (Majority) **80** _._ **7** 77 _._ 9 **79** _._ **3** **83** _._ **1** 72 _._ 1 **77** _._ **2** **79** _._ **3** **76** _._ **8** **78** _._ **0** **82** _._ **2** **71** _._ **4** **76** _._ **4**

      - Follow-up 76 _._ 4 71 _._ 1 73 _._ 7 78 _._ 7 64 _._ 8 71 _._ 1 66 _._ 6 70 _._ 1 68 _._ 3 70 _._ 9 65 _._ 8 68 _._ 3


Table 5: Precision (P), Recall (R), and F1 scores for LMVLM with GPT-3 as EXAMINER and EXAMINEE, compared to baselines. The last row shows an ablation of our method without the follow-up questions stage.



**Models** We use CHATGPT (gpt-3.5-turbo),
GPT-3 (text-davinci-003) (Brown et al., 2020;
Ouyang et al., 2022), and LLAMA-7B (Touvron
et al., 2023), in three EXAMINER vs. EXAMINEE
cross-examination settings: GPT-3 vs. GPT-3,
CHATGPT vs. CHATGPT, and CHATGPT vs.
LLAMA. Notably, using the same LM as EXAM
INER and EXAMINEE (except for their prompts,
which are different), provides a cleaner setting
where both LMs share the same knowledge. The
prompts used for each LM at every stage of the
examination are shown in Table 1.


**Baselines** For each setting, we compare
LMVLM with recent methods for uncertainty
detection and variants of our approach:


- **Confidence-Based** : The prediction head of LMs
outputs a probability for the predicted token.
It is a common practice to use this probability as a measure of confidence in the prediction
(Yoshikawa and Okazaki, 2023). In our case, the
LM generates a multi-token claim, and we calculate the confidence for the claim as the product
of probabilities for all predicted tokens of the
answer only. In order to output a binary decision
(i.e., is the claim correct or not), we optimize
a threshold over the train dataset to maximize
F1. Note that our examination approach does not
require tuning any threshold.

- **Are you sure?** **(AYS)** : Recent work (Kadavath



et al., 2022; Cohen et al., 2023) has shown that
LMs can be trained to estimate their certainty in
generated facts. Here, we use a zero-shot version of this approach where we directly “ask” the
model whether it is sure. Specifically, we add the
following prompt right after the claim generation:
“Are you sure regarding the correctness
of your claim? Please answer with Yes or
No”. Then we take the output as the prediction
whether the claim is correct or not.

- **I** **don’t** **know** **(IDK)** : Recently, Ganguli et al.
(2023) showed that LMs might have the capability to self-correct themselves, when instructed to
do so. Here we instruct the model to output _“I_
_don’t know”_ if it is uncertain, by concatenating
the following sentence to the original query: "If
you are not sure you know the answer,
answer with ’I don’t know’ only.". If
the model answers ‘I don’t know’ we label the
corresponding claim as false, and otherwise true.

- **In-context IDK (IC-IDK)** : We teach the model
to output that it doesn’t know the answer, via incontext demonstrations. We follow Cohen et al.
(2023) and test each of the queries within an incontext setting. For each query, we first provide
the model with _K_ demonstrations, as _D_ of them
labeled as _“Don’t know”_ examples, while the rest
_K −_ _D_ are provided with their gold answer from
the dataset. The _“Don’t know”_ examples are randomly selected out of a set of examples the model




---PAGE BREAK---

LAMA TriviaQA NQ PopQA

**P** **R** **F1** **P** **R** **F1** **P** **R** **F1** **P** **R** **F1**


AYS 61 _._ 4 38 _._ 0 46 _._ 9 60 _._ 0 35 _._ 7 44 _._ 8 71 _._ 1 15 _._ 0 24 _._ 8 74 _._ 8 14 _._ 2 23 _._ 9
IC-IDK 56 _._ 6 49 _._ 0 52 _._ 5 58 _._ 9 52 _._ 5 55 _._ 5 66 _._ 2 53 _._ 4 59 _._ 1 66 _._ 8 50 _._ 1 57 _._ 3
IDK 61 _._ 6 44 _._ 8 51 _._ 9 62 _._ 0 32 _._ 9 43 _._ 0 64 _._ 4 12 _._ 1 20 _._ 4 66 _._ 7 16 _._ 8 26 _._ 8
Confidence-Based 54 _._ 9 **76** _._ **7** 64 _._ 0 56 _._ 9 **85** _._ **8** 68 _._ 4 64 _._ 4 63 _._ 5 63 _._ 9 64 _._ 6 53 _._ 6 58 _._ 6


**LMVLM** 81 _._ 1 66 _._ 4 73 _._ 0 80 _._ 1 70 _._ 8 75 _._ 2 79 _._ 3 65 _._ 5 71 _._ 7 84 _._ 9 73 _._ 6 78 _._ 8
**LMVLM** (Majority) **82** _._ **9** 73 _._ 9 **78** _._ **1** **80** _._ **3** 76 _._ 8 **78** _._ **5** **83** _._ **7** **74** _._ **2** **78** _._ **7** **88** _._ **3** **77** _._ **4** **82** _._ **5**

      - Follow-up 79 _._ 7 65 _._ 7 72 _._ 0 80 _._ 0 69 _._ 8 74 _._ 6 79 _._ 4 63 _._ 7 70 _._ 7 83 _._ 3 71 _._ 8 77 _._ 1


Table 6: Precision (P), Recall (R), and F1 scores for LMVLM with CHATGPT as EXAMINER and LLAMA as
EXAMINEE, compared to baselines. The last row is an ablation of our method without the follow-up questions
stage.



LAMA TriviaQA NQ PopQA


GPT-3 65.7 98.4 89.9 83.1
GPT-3 (Majority) 75.8 98.5 92.0 88.0


CHATGPT 83.6 97.9 90.4 88.8
CHATGPT (Majority) 87.1 98.6 94.2 93.9


Table 7: Accuracy of GPT-3 and CHATGPT as EXAMINER on false claims generated for each dataset.


failed on, while evaluating it on an held-out set of
examples from the dataset in a zero-shot setting.
Intuitively, these examples’ answers are likely
to be unknown to the model, hence we labeled
them with _“Don’t_ _know”_ . The model predictions are either a target text or _“Don’t_ _know”_ .
Based on the output, we generate a factuality label as in the IDK baseline above. Notably, this
baseline requires labeled data for the in-context
demonstrations, which is not necessary for our
approach.

- **LMVLM** : A single execution of our method,
where we accept or reject the claim according to
the examiner’s final decision.

- **LMVLM** **(Majority)** : For a given claim, we
apply our method three times (with the same
EXAMINER and EXAMINEE), using sampling
generation for follow-up questions generation.
We reject the claim in case at least two of the
examinations concluded it is false.


Since output probabilities are not provided as
part of the CHATGPT’s API, we cannot provide
results for the Confidence-Based baselines in this
case. Moreover, we observe that CHATGPT often
fails to understand the task of IC-IDK.


**4.2** **Results**


Tables 4, 5, 6 show the results for the settings
CHATGPT vs. CHATGPT, GPT-3 vs. GPT-3,
and LLAMA vs. CHATGPT, respectively. Across



# of follow-up iter- 1 _._ 9 _±_ 1 _._ 2 1 _._ 3 _±_ 0 _._ 7 1 _._ 6 _±_ 1 _._ 0
ations


# of questions per 3 _._ 1 _±_ 2 _._ 1 2 _._ 7 _±_ 1 _._ 6 2 _._ 9 _±_ 1 _._ 9
iteration


% of inconclusive 14 _._ 8% 9 _._ 1% 10 _._ 3%
examiner decisions


Table 8: Cross-examination statistics for each setting
(EXAMINER/EXAMINEE), averaged across datasets.


all settings, our method outperforms the baselines,
often by a large gap. For example, it obtains 85 _._ 4
F1 compared to _≤_ 65 _._ 2 by baselines for CHATGPT on PopQA (Table 4), and 77 _._ 2 F1 compared
to _≤_ 60 _._ 1 for GPT-3 on TriviaQA (Table 5). Notably, the most substantial gains are in terms of
recall, showing the superiority of our method in detecting factually incorrect claims (when compared
to the baselines which achieve reasonable precision too). Interestingly, we observe that CHATGPT
generally outperforms GPT-3.
Last, Table 7 shows the accuracy of our method
and baselines on our Falsehood dataset. For both
CHATGPT and GPT-3, LMVLM successfully rejects the vast majority of the false claims, obtaining
87%-98% accuracy with CHATGPT and 75%-99%
with GPT-3 across all datasets.


**4.3** **Ablations**


We perform an ablation, where we remove the
follow-up iterations in the examination process to
gauge their benefit. Results are reported for GPT-3
in Table 5 (last row), showing a large decrease in
performance (e.g. 78 _→_ 68 _._ 3 in F1 for NQ and
77 _._ 2 _→_ 71 _._ 1 for TriviaQA). Notably, recall scores



CHATGPT / GPT-3 / CHATGPT /
CHATGPT GPT-3 LLAMA


# of questions 7 _._ 0 _±_ 2 _._ 8 6 _._ 4 _±_ 4 _._ 3 6 _._ 8 _±_ 4 _._ 4



# of follow-up
questions per
iteration



1 _._ 3 _±_ 1 _._ 0 1 _._ 3 _±_ 0 _._ 6 1 _._ 1 _±_ 0 _._ 5




---PAGE BREAK---

**Pattern** **Example statements/questions generated by EXAMINER during examination**


Rephrasing the Claim: _“The first Fast and Furious film was released in 2001.”_
claim In which year was the first Fast and Furious film released?


Rephrasing Claim: _“The screenwriter who is credited with writing the screenplay for Winner is Wendy Riss”_
Questions 1. What is the name of the screenwriter who is credited with writing the screenplay
for Winner? 2. Who is credited with writing the screenplay for Winner?


Validation of Claim: _“The director of The Town was Ben Affleck.”_
Implications Is Ben Affleck known for directing any movies?


Logical Claim: _“The second oldest of the Pevensie children in C S Lewis’s The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe_
decomposition _is Edmund.”_
1. What is the birth order of the Pevensie children in C S Lewis’s The Lion, the
Witch and the Wardrobe? 2. What are their ages? 3. Who appears second in this list?


Request for Claim: _“The screenwriter of Cover Up is Bill Blake”_
attribution Is there any evidence or documentation that supports the claim that Bill Blake was
the screenwriter for Cover Up?



Wrong
intermediate
answers



Claim: _“There are eight vertices (corners) on an octahedron.”_
EXAMINER: How many vertices does an octahedron have? EXAMINEE: An octahedron has
eight vertices, each of which is the point where three edges meet.



Table 9: Examples for frequent patterns of CHATGPT and GPT-3 observed through manual analysis of crossexaminations.



are decreased by 6%-10%. Overall, this shows the
importance of the follow-up questions issued by
the examiner to assess the examinee’s claim.


**5** **Analysis of Cross-Examinations**


We analyze cross-examinations by GPT-3 and
CHATGPT to better understand the success and
failure cases of our method. We find that examiner
LMs typically ask multiple questions in the examination, and perhaps surprisingly, apply different
strategies to reveal inconsistencies.


**Examination Statistics** Table 8 provides statistics on the cross-examinations performed by CHATGPT and GPT-3. Both models introduce multiple
queries (6-7 on average) during an examination,
with typically 1-2 steps of follow-up questions,
which are important for the examiner’s decision
(§4.3). We also observe a non-negligible number
of claims (9%-15%) where the examiner LM does
not arrive at a concrete final decision (i.e., it does
not generate “correct” or “incorrect” as the final
decision, we reject the claim in those cases). In our
qualitative analysis, we identify reasons that could
explain these cases.


**Qualitative** **Analysis** We manually analyze a
sample of 96 examinations – 48 by each LM, with
6 correct and 6 incorrect examinations for each
model and each dataset. We observe the following
trends (examples are in Table 9):

1. **Rephrasing** **the** **claim** : In about 60% of the
examinations, both LMs introduce questions



which are paraphrases of the original question.
This supports the assumption that the EXAM
INER seeks inconsistencies by generating variants of the original claim.

2. **Rephrasing Questions** : In about half of the examinations, both LMs introduce questions that
are similar to previously asked questions or have
a different phrasing. This is a desirable behavior
as it can reveal inconsistencies if the examinee
provides a different answer for the same question.

3. **Validation** **of** **logical** **implications** : The EX
AMINER asks EXAMINEE regarding implied arguments that must be true whenever the original
claim is correct. This can be observed in 70%
of the correct detections of GPT-3, and 87 _._ 5%
out of the correct detections of CHATGPT.

4. **Logical** **questions** : The EXAMINER decomposes the claim into multiple sub-questions
which together compose a trajectory to validating it. Such decompositions appear in about
75% of the cases for CHATGPT but only 10% in
GPT-3. We observe these in 33% of the correct
detections of GPT-3, and 70% for CHATGPT.

5. **Request for attribution** : The EXAMINER ask
the EXAMINEE about the existence of external
evidence to support the claim. This happens in
about 30% of the cases for both LMs.

6. **Wrong** **intermediate** **answers** : The EXAMI
NEE responds with factually incorrect answers
to one or more of the questions originated by




---PAGE BREAK---

